Initial guide text for approvals and especially approvals assignments (#1518)
paritytech/polkadot: roadmap/implementers-guide/src/node/validity/approvals.md

# Approval subsystem

The approval subsystem determines whether a relay chain block can be considered for finality.  It does so by running validity checks on the candidates declared available in that relay chain block.  

These approval validity checks differ from the backing validity checks performed before starting availability:

- In backing, adversaries could select when they propose invalid candidates based upon when they control the parachain's backing validators who perform the checks.

> - In approvals, we randomly assigns individual validators to check specific candidates without giving adversaries foreknowledge about either which honest validators get assigned to which candidates, or even how many check.  Availability prevents adversaries from choosing which validators obtain their possibly invalid candidate.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- In approvals, we randomly assign individual validators to check specific candidates without giving adversaries' foreknowledge about either which honest validators get assigned to which candidates, or even how many check.  Availability prevents adversaries from choosing which validators obtain their possibly invalid candidate.
```

> As such, approval checks provide significantly more security than backing checks, so polkadot achieves some fixed security level most efficiently when we perform more approval checks per backing check or per relay chain block.  

Reviewer: ```suggestion
As such, approval checks provide significantly more security than backing checks, so Polkadot achieves some fixed security level most efficiently when we perform more approval checks per backing check or per relay chain block.  
```

Author: Yes same thing.   It appears these comments gets folded in when mixed with a merged suggestion.

Approval has roughly two parts:

- **Assignments** ensures that each candidates receives enough random checkers, while reducing adversaries odds for obtaining enough checkers, and limiting adversaries foreknowledge.  It tracks approval votes to identify "no show" approval check takes suspiciously long, perhaps indicating the node being under attack, and assigns more checks in this case.  It tracks relay chain equivocations to determine when adversaries possibly gained foreknowledge about assignments, and adds additional checks in this case.

- **Approval checks** listens to the assignments subsystem for outgoing assignment notices that we shall check specific candidates.  It then performs these checks by first invoking the reconstruction subsystem to obtain the candidate, second invoking the candidate validity utility subsystem upon the candidate, and finally sending out an approval vote, or perhaps initiating a dispute.

There are rewards computations on-chain too, which runs the assignments code to determine approval, but does so after the fact.

...

### Gossip

> Any validator could send their assignment notices and/or approval votes too early.  We gossip the approval votes because they represent a major commitment by the validator.  We delay gossiping the assignment notices until they agree with our local clock.

Reviewer: What do you mean by agreeing with our clock?

Author: It needs some leniency if that's what you mean?

Author: 94f65ab1

### Future work

> We could consider additional gossip messages with which nodes claims "slow availability" and/or "slow candidate" to fine tune the assignments "no show" system, but long enough "no show" delays suffice probably.

Author: https://github.com/paritytech/polkadot/issues/1269#issuecomment-667650052

> # Approval subsystem

Reviewer 2: Can you add this file to the `SUMMARY.md` which constructs the book? Is this the approvals subsystem or the approval subsystem? The file name should reflect that.

Author: db2a8eec

I'll place them under validity for now, but I've no idea where these go really, nor even if disputes and approvals go into the same crate, although I suspect no..

The approval subsystem determines whether a relay chain block can be considered for finality.  It does so by running validity checks on the candidates declared available in that relay chain block.  

These approval validity checks differ from the backing validity checks performed before starting availability:

- In backing, adversaries could select when they propose invalid candidates based upon when they control the parachain's backing validators who perform the checks.

- In approvals, we randomly assigns individual validators to check specific candidates without giving adversaries foreknowledge about either which honest validators get assigned to which candidates, or even how many check.  Availability prevents adversaries from choosing which validators obtain their possibly invalid candidate.

As such, approval checks provide significantly more security than backing checks, so polkadot achieves some fixed security level most efficiently when we perform more approval checks per backing check or per relay chain block.  

...

> Approval requires two gossiped message types, assignment notices created by its assignments subsystem, and approval votes sent by our approval checks subsystem when authorized by the candidate validity utility subsystem.  

Reviewer 2: Oh, these are actually gossiped? Can we bound them somehow? I guess only those where the VRF is low enough & view of ourself and the peer overlaps.

In other cases, we have separate subsystems for networking and core logic. But we can handle the split of this file into individual components after this is merged.

Author: Assignment notices should always arrive several seconds before their approval vote. 

Assignment notices are bounded by them being VRF signatures:  Any validator could gossip out maybe num_relay_vrf_modulo + num_cores assignment notices but those num_cores would not be gossiped onwards by other validators until their delay_tranche output by the VRF gets reached, which lies beyond the senders' control.  You could make this more polite if you liked, but not sure that's necessarily. 

Approval votes are always gossiped so yes every validator could send out num_cores approval votes, but doing so sounds mildly risky.

Approval has roughly two parts:

> - **Assignments** ensures that each candidates receives enough random checkers, while reducing adversaries odds for obtaining enough checkers, and limiting adversaries foreknowledge.  It tracks approval votes to identify "no show" approval check takes suspiciously long, perhaps indicating the node being under attack, and assigns more checks in this case.  It tracks relay chain equivocations to determine when adversaries possibly gained foreknowledge about assignments, and adds additional checks in this case.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- **Assignments** ensures that each candidate receives enough random checkers, while reducing adversaries' odds for obtaining enough checkers, and limiting adversaries' foreknowledge.  It tracks approval votes to identify when "no show" approval check takes suspiciously long, perhaps indicating the node being under attack, and assigns more checks in this case.  It tracks relay chain equivocations to determine when adversaries possibly gained foreknowledge about assignments, and adds additional checks in this case.
```

candidates->candidate
adversaries->adversaries'
identify->identify when

and maybe we could leave out the part about equivocations for now, because I don't think we'll implement that in the first go

Reviewer 2: I guess the point of confusion here is that the "approvals" page here refers to assignments, but there's a separate page on assignments that should have the information on assignments.

Author: Assignments is kinda a subthing, but maybe partially useful on-chain, but..

> - **Approval checks** listens to the assignments subsystem for outgoing assignment notices that we shall check specific candidates.  It then performs these checks by first invoking the reconstruction subsystem to obtain the candidate, second invoking the candidate validity utility subsystem upon the candidate, and finally sending out an approval vote, or perhaps initiating a dispute.

Reviewer 2: This references an assignments subsystem which hasn't been defined.

What are "outgoing assignment notices"? Are these notifications from some other piece of code that we need to be checking some particular candidate?

Great that this references reconstruction & candidate validity : ) - that's exactly how this will be implemented.

There are rewards computations on-chain too, which runs the assignments code to determine approval, but does so after the fact.

...

### Approval keys

> We need two separate keys for the approval subsystem

Reviewer 2: Oh, so this implies _yet another_ session key?

not sure if we have yet migrated a Substrate chain to add more session keys, but it should be doable. However, there is a bootstrapping concern here. When migrating the chain nobody will have yet registered the extra key, but we can't just throw out the validator set.

So I think the process would be that we'd have to add the session key, make an announcement that everyone should rotate session keys, and then enable parachains.

Or is there some way that both of these keys can be the same? It would make the practicalities of upgrading the relay-chain much simpler

Author: We could make the approval vote key be the grandpa key.  We could always separate them if some distant future super-sentry node iteration would support consensus running on a separate machine from candidate worker nodes or whatever. 

We need either the assignments key to be some new key immune to large slashes, or else some validators would ask that assignments by run in a remote signer, which sounds absolutely nightmarish.

Reviewer 2: I see, that makes a lot of sense. Expounding on the "risk" these keys have as the reason for the separation would make sense in this section. I'm fine with reusing the GRANDPA key for that, although we will be upgrading that to BLS at some point. Maybe makes most sense to just upgrade and add the extra key type, put out an announcement that every validator should rotate their session keys, and then enable parachains a few weeks later

Author: We actually cannot wholly replace Schnorr with BLS because BLS verification seems just too slow.  We'll likely add a BLS12-381 G1 point with a Schnorr proof-of-possession as either the only or as a second GRANDPA public key, but we've then two choices:

1.  We could sign GRANDPA messages first with this BLS public key and then sign that signed message with the Ed25519 public key.  We could even replace Ed25519 with Rabin-Williams here, which gets shockingly fast.  We'll need slashing condition for when something messy happens.

2.  We sign GRANDPA messages with a Schnorr VRF using this BLS public key, so verification runs much slower than Ed25519, but still vastly faster than BLS signatures.  At this point the VRF pre-output actually is a BLS signature however, so we can transition smoothly to BLS verification whenever we gain enough signatures for aggregation to help, but doing this avoids any slashing conditions.

Author: I just say to use ed25519 for approval vote keys now, which along with previous tweaks seemingly finishes this one.  Anything else?

> - **Approval assignment keys** are sr25519/schnorrkel keys used only for the assignment criteria VRF.  We implicitly sign assignment notices with approval assignment keys by including their relay chain context and additional data in the VRF's extra message, but exclude these from its VRF input.  

Reviewer 2: This could just be the `Parachains` key that we already have, right?

Reviewer 2: Also, can you explain what the relay chain context and additional data refer to? Or maybe rather, who the "they" is in that statement?

Author: Assignments key should not be associated with any slashing conditions.

Author: 1d4b69b0

> - **Approval vote keys** would only sign off on candidate parblock validity.  

Reviewer 2: this section doesn't say what key type should be used. Although the following text gives some background information on how such a choice might be made, a concrete choice would be best at this level. Do you suggest ed25519?

Author: It's fine either way really, but ed25519 enables both the grandpa key doing double duty, and HSM support.

Author: 1d4b69b0

Approval vote keys could easily be handled by some hardened signer tooling, perhaps even HSMs if we select ed25519 for approval vote keys.  Approval assignment keys might or might not support hardened signer tooling, but they represent only minimal slashing risk for validator operator.  

In future, we shall determine which among the several hardening techniques best benefits the netwrok as a whole.  We could provide a multi-process multi-machine architecture for validators, perhaps even reminiscent of GNUNet, or perhaps more resembling smart HSM tooling.  We might instead design a system that more resembled full systems, like like Cosmos' sentry nodes.  In either case, approval assignments might be handled by a slightly hardened machine, but not necessarily nearly as hardened as approval votes, but approval votes machines must similarly run foreign WASM code, which increases their risk, so assignments being separate sounds helpful.  

### Gossip

> Any validator could send their assignment notices and/or approval votes too early.  We gossip the approval votes because they represent a major commitment by the validator.  We delay gossiping the assignment notices until they agree with our local clock.

Reviewer 2: OK, this is an interesting point. Thanks for including it. Is there any element of DoS we should worry about?

I also expect this to be "agree with our local clock, with a lenience of N seconds" in practice.

Author: Yes, some leniency here

Author: 94f65ab1

### Future work

We could consider additional gossip messages with which nodes claims "slow availability" and/or "slow candidate" to fine tune the assignments "no show" system, but long enough "no show" delays suffice probably.

We shall develop more practical experience with UDP once the availability system works using direct UDP connections.  In this, we should discover if reconstruction performs adequately with a complete graphs or  

> benefits from topology restrictions.  At this point, an assignment notices could implicitly request pieces from a random 1/3rd, perhaps topology restricted, which saves one gossip round.  If this preliminary fast reconstruction fails, then nodes' request alternative pieces directly.  There is an interesting design space in how this overlaps with "slow availability" claims.

Reviewer 2: oh, that's cool. cc @infinity0
